LEONARDO DA VINCI

HIS BIRTH

Leonardo Da Vinci, the many-sided genius of the Italian Renaissance,
was born, as his name implies, at the little town of Vinci, which is
about six miles from Empoli and twenty miles west of Florence. Vinci
is still very inaccessible, and the only means of conveyance is the
cart of a general carrier and postman, who sets out on his journey
from Empoli at sunrise and sunset. Outside a house in the middle of
the main street of Vinci to-day a modern and white-washed bust of the
great artist is pointed to with much pride by the inhabitants.
Leonardo's traditional birthplace on the outskirts of the town still
exists, and serves now as the headquarters of a farmer and small wine
exporter.

Leonardo di Ser Piero d'Antonio di Ser Piero di Ser Guido da
Vinci--for that was his full legal name--was the natural and
first-born son of Ser Piero, a country notary, who, like his father,
grandfather, and great-grandfather, followed that honourable
vocation with distinction and success, and who subsequently--when
Leonardo was a youth--was appointed notary to the Signoria of
Florence. Leonardo's mother was one Caterina, who afterwards married
Accabriga di Piero del Vaccha of Vinci.

[Illustration: Plate II.--Annunciation

In the Uffizi Gallery, Florence. No. 1288. 3 ft 3 ins. By 6 ft 11 ins.
(0.99 x 2.18)

Although this panel is included in the Uffizi Catalogue as being by
Leonardo, it is in all probability by his master, Verrocchio.]

The date of Leonardo's birth is not known with any certainty. His age
is given as five in a taxation return made in 1457 by his grandfather
Antonio, in whose house he was educated; it is therefore concluded
that he was born in 1452. Leonardo's father Ser Piero, who afterwards
