and shade apart from colour; but, as one critic has pointed out, his
gift of chiaroscuro cost the colour-life of many a noble picture.
Leonardo was "a tonist, not a colourist," before whom the whole book
of nature lay open.

It was not instability of character but versatility of mind which
caused him to undertake many things that having commenced he
afterwards abandoned, and the probability is that as soon as he saw
exactly how he could solve any difficulty which presented itself, he
put on one side the merely perfunctory execution of such a task.

In the Forster collection in the Victoria and Albert museum three of
Leonardo's note-books with sketches are preserved, and it is stated
that it was his practice to carry about with him, attached to his
girdle, a little book for making sketches. They prove that he was
left-handed and wrote from right to left.




HIS MIND

We can readily believe the statements of Benvenuto Cellini, the
sixteenth-century Goldsmith, that Francis I. "did not believe
that any other man had come into the world who had attained so great a
knowledge as Leonardo, and that not only as sculptor, painter, and
architect, for beyond that he was a profound philosopher." It was
Cellini also who contended that "Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, and
Raphael are the Book of the World."

Leonardo anticipated many eminent scientists and inventors in the
methods of investigation which they adopted to solve the many problems
with which their names are coupled. Among these may be cited
Copernicus' theory of the earth's movement, Lamarck's classification
of vertebrate and invertebrate animals, the laws of friction,
the laws of combustion and respiration, the elevation of the
continents, the laws of gravitation, the undulatory theory of light
and heat, steam as a motive power in navigation, flying machines, the
